# Week 2

## Paging (caching)

### Deterministic paging

Given $k$ slots for cache. To optimize the competitive ratio of ALG and OPT.

- LIFO: Last In First Out
- LFU: Least Frequently Used
- FIFO: First In First Out
- LRU: Least Recently Used

Claim: LIFO and LFU is bad. e.g. $k = 3$.

Worst case:

- LIFO: $1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 2, ...$ (ratio $O(n)$, $n$ is input size)
- LFO: $1, 1, ... , 1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 2, ...$ (ratio $O(n)$)
- FIFO/LRU: $1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, ...$ (ratio $k + 1$, exactly $k + 1$ times)

Why FIFO/LRU so good? Consider divide into phases, in each phase there is exactly $k$ different pages. e.g. for sequence $1, 2, 1, 2, 2, 3, 2, 1, 1$, the phases are $1, 2, 1, 2, 2$ and $3, 2$ and $1, 1$. Consider the second place in a phase to the first place in the next phase, like $2, 1, 2, 2, 3$ in the example, called **chunk**. In one chunk, there is surely $k + 1$ different pages. So the OPT must increase by $1$ in such a chunk. Now check FIFO and LRU in detail:

- LRU: in a chunk, before the last page is accessed, all the newly-input pages will go into cache and will not be replace. So there's at most $k$ evictions. The last page access will bring a new eviction. So the competitive ratio is $k + 1$.
- FIFO: similarly, in a chunk, after a page is inserted into cache, it will not be evicted.

### With some randomness

Marking algorithm:

When we receive a request

- Is it in the cache?
    1. Yes -> 1: mark the page.
    2. No -> 2: find an arbitrary unmarked page, evict it, and mark the new page.
    3. No -> 3: everyone is marked, change a phase, unmark everyone, goto 2.

Denote $m_i$ new pages in phase $i$, compared with the last phase.

Surely, OPT is greater then $\sum\frac{m_i} {k}$.

Consider the ALG. For new pages, the payload is surely $1$. For old pages, the first old page has a probability of $\frac {m_i} {k}$ to be evicted. The second is $\frac {m_i} {k - 1}$

So that the competitive ratio is $\sum\frac{m_i} {k} + \sum\frac{m_i} {k - 1} + \sum\frac{m_i} {k - 2} + ... + \sum\frac{m_i} {1} = m_i(\frac{1} {k} + \frac{1} {k - 1} + ... + \frac{1} {1}) = m_iH_k$.

$H_k$ is the $k$-th harmonic number, so the competitive ratio is $O(\log k)$.

### Yao's minmax principle

> For any deterministic algorithm, there exists a distribution of inputs such that the competitive ratio is at least the expected competitive ratio.

$A$ is an algorithm, $I$ is input. $c_A(I) = \frac{E[A(I)]} {E[OPT(I)]}$.

The best competitive ratio among all randomized algorithms is $$X = \min_{A} \max_{I} c_A(I)$$.

- Story: the designer gives $A$ first, and then the adversary gives $I$.

The worst competitive ratio for a fixed input (randomized algorithm) is $$Y = \max_{I} \min_{A} c_A(I)$$.

Von Neumann's Minmax Theorem: $X = Y$.
