# 0225 Lecture Notes

## 3 Key points

- Confidentiality (No reading)
- Integrity (Cannot write without being detected)
- Authenticity (No impersonation)

## Some models

- Symmetric key model: A & B holds the same key
- Asymmetric key model: every one has 2 keys, 1 public & 1 private

Kerckhoff's principle: The security of a cryptosystem should not depend on the secrecy of the algorithm, only the **key**.

## Threat model (or attack model)

| - | Can E trick A into encrypting a message for E? | Can E trick B into decrypting a message for E? |
| - | - | - |
| ciphertext-only | - | - |
| chosen-plaintext | x | - |
| chosen-ciphertext | - | x |
| chosen-plaintext & chosen-ciphertext | x | x |

We focus on chosen plaintext attacks.

> Remark: Why we choose chosen-plain? In public key model, public key is known to everyone, so Eve can ask for encryption of any message.

## Formal definition

### Confidentiality

- Eve chooses 2 messages $M_0, M_1$ of same length
- Alice chooses one message at random $M_b$, encrypts it and sends it to Eve
- Eve knows exactly one of them are sned, but doesn't know which one
- Eve reads the ciphertext and tries to guess which message was sent
- If probability of guessing correctly is $\frac{1}{2} + \epsilon$, then the encryption scheme is $\epsilon$-secure

> Remark: $\epsilon < \frac{1}{poly(n)}$
> Eve can choose $M_0$, $M_1$, so the algorithm should be free of bugs.

#### IND-CPA (Indistinguishability under Chosen-Plaintext Attack)

Eve can ask for encryption of any message.

Therefore, deterministic encryption is not secure (Eve can ask in advance for encryption of $M_0$ and $M_1$)

#### Example: Diffie-Hellman key exchange

- A has $M$ and $f$, B has $g$
- A send B $f(M)$
- B send A $g(f(M))$
- A computes $f^{-1}(g(f(M))) = g(M)$
- A sends $g(M)$ to B
- B computes $g^{-1}(g(M)) = M$

Key insight: $f$ and $g$ must have some algebraic structure.

In Diffie-Hellman, we have $p$, a prime number known to everyone (even Eve) and we have $g$.

Then, A send B $g^a \mod p$, B sends A $g^b \mod p$, and they can compute $g^{ab} \mod p$.

Due to the **discrete logarithm** problem, Eve cannot compute $g^{ab} \mod p$ or $a$ or $b$.

> Remark: This is an important assumption.

#### Example: ElGamal encryption

$KeyGen()$:

- B generates private key $b$ and public key $B = g^b \mod p$

$Enc(g^b , M)$:

- A generates random $r$, computes $g^r \mod p$
- Alice computes $M \times (g^b)^r \mod p$
- Alice sends $(g^r, M \times (g^b)^r)$

$Dec(b, g^r, M \times (g^b)^r)$:

- Calculate $M \times (g^b)^r \times (g^r)^{-b} = M$

#### Hybrid encryption

First, we generate a random key $k$ and encrypt the message with $k$ using symmetric key encryption.

Then, we encrypt $k$ using public key encryption.

> Remark: symmetric key encryption is faster than public key encryption, but not as powerful as public key encryption.

### Cryptographic hash functions

1. One-way:

- Given $h(x)$, it is hard to find $x$
- Given $x$, it is hard to find $x'$ where $h(x) = h(x')$
