# 0304 Lecture Notes part2: Bitcoin

## Ledger

Ledger: account-base ledger. "Is this transaction valid?" is the question that the ledger answers.

In a centralized system, the bank answers the question. The bank maintains a table of the balance of each account. The bank also maintains a table of transactions. The bank checks if the transaction is valid by checking if the account has enough balance.

(account, balance) is the core table.

In transaction-based ledger (used by Bitcoin), the records are only transactions, without (account, balance) table.

The core object is transaction output (referred as **TXO**).

A transaction can consume only the unspent transaction output (UTXO). It is referred as **UTXO** model.

> Remark: Output can be consumed only once. Once used, it will be split.
> It maintains like a (owner, value) pair.
> We may make the following comparison:
>
> account-based ~ bank
> UTXO-based ~ cash

Transaction chain of bitcoin:

$Tx1 \rightarrow Tx2 \rightarrow Tx3 \rightarrow Tx4$

## How to guarantee the authenticity of the transaction?

The owner should be able to prove that he/she is the owner of the UTXO.

In Bitcoin, public key is used the identity of the owner. The owner should prove that he/she has the private key corresponding to the public key.

Each TXO is a $(\text{public key}, \text{value})$ pair.

When a user issues a transaction $t_x$ to consume a $TXO$ with $(\text{public key}, \text{value})$, he needs to provide a signature $\sigma$ such that $Verify(\text{public key}, t_x, \sigma) = 1$.

> Remark: this can not prevent double spending. We will discuss this later. Each transaction will be eventually visible to all users.
> Remark(2): Once a private key is lost, the coin is lost forever.
> Remark(3): If multiple inputs are used, the signature is the combination of all signatures, which needed to verified by each public key. e.g. $Verify(\text{public key}_1, t_x, \sigma_{x,1}) = 1$ and $Verify(\text{public key}_2, t_x, \sigma_{x,2}) = 1$.

## How to ensure privacy?

1. one-coin-each-address? (can work, but still can be traced through chain)
2. using hash as result? (no use)
