# W3

Origin meaning of "architecture": the act or practice of designing and building structures.

In computer science, architecture refers to the fundamental organization of a system embodied in its components, their relationships to each other, and to the environment, and the principles guiding its design and evolution. (by IEEE)

Protocal Stack: a set of layers, each layer performs a subset of the required communication functions.

- OSI 7-Layer Model
    1. Physical Layer, like cables, connectors, etc.
    2. Data Link Layer, (MAC) like Ethernet, WiFi, etc.
    3. Network Layer, like IP, etc.
    4. Transport Layer, like TCP, UDP, etc.
    5. Session Layer, like HTTP, etc.
    6. Presentation Layer, like JPEG, etc.
    7. Application Layer, like FTP, etc.

Contents of network architecture:

- Where and how state is maintained and how it is removed?
- What entities are named?
- How naming, addressing, and routing functions inter-relate and how they're performed?
- How communication functions are modularized, e.g., into layers to form a protocal stack?
...

> Concept: Jitter is the variation in time delay between when a signal is transmitted and when it's received over a network connection, measuring the variability in ping.
> Peer to peer interface: format, delay

subnet: a portion of a network that shares a common address component (do not use ip address). use a frame to send data to a subnet.

> switch (交换机) does not have MAC address

Security:

1. 私密性 Confidentiality
2. 完整性 Integrity
3. 认证 Authentication
4. 可用性 Availability
5. 不可否认 Non-repudiation
6. 授权 Authorization
